URANUS 


STORY

Uranus is the planet that spins on its side. By the time I’m wrapped in its windiness, I can no longer tell what sideways is anymore. I dial in directions for the equator, because I read that the winds are retrograde at the equator, blowing in the reverse of the planet’s rotation. Everything is a beautiful blue-green colour from the methane gas in the atmosphere. It’s kind of like being inside of an aquamarine wind tunnel. While flying away, I get a good look at its thirteen faint rings and twenty-seven small moons (I counted). Other ships signal hello with their lights.

(continued in Neptune)


NOTES

Uranus is one of the two Ice Giants in our solar system, and has the third largest diameter (after Jupiter and Saturn). Its unique blue-green colour is a result of the small amount of methane gas in its atmosphere. Other components of its atmosphere include hydrogen, helium, as well as traces of water and ammonia.

Unlike the other planets, Uranus spins on its side at an almost 90 degree angle. Although larger than Neptune, its density is much smaller (it is the second least dense planet in the solar system). Soundwaves might be impacted by the lack of density, and possibly dampened by the gas clouds in its atmosphere.

Calculations (by Dr. Conor Nixon) used in the Uranus plug-in design:

Surface pressure ‘P’ (bar): 1.000
Surface temperature ’T’ (K): 80
Gas components: Hydrogen (82.5%), Helium (15.2%), Methane (2.3%)
Mean Molecular Weight (g): 2.63
Atmospheric Density ‘rho’ (kg/m3): 0.39
Mean Adiabatic Index (gamma): 1.60
Speed Sound (m/s): 637
Speed Sound Relative to Earth = 1: 183.68%
Pitch shift of middle ‘C’ (Hz): 479

(Stefana Fratila)

Source and further information: https://solarsystem.nasa.gov/planets/uranus/ 


METHODOLOGY

How might embodied subjects perceive sound waves as they travel through the different atmospheres of our solar system? How would the vibrations of Venus feel to a fleshy form? If we were to put our ears to the ground, or lie down our bodies, would we not feel the Mercuryquakes below the surface? And isn’t feeling sound the epitome of experiencing it? These questions constituted my conversations with scientists and researchers at NASA between 2018 and 2019. 

As I began my research, it was immediately apparent that every planet (except for Mercury) is incredibly windy. My mind was racing, imagining the planets as windy tunnels and reverberant rooms: if I could turn the wind off, what would my voice, or my songs, sound like then? To find out, I had to imagine the interplanetary weather patterns and geographical features as music, as if the thunder clouds and volcanoes were musical instruments in and of themselves. Every planet has its own frequency; if we decide that Earth is middle C (261.63 Hertz), each other planet must also have its own pitch based on its own surface pressure, surface temperature, gas components and atmospheric density.

I relied extensively on calculations made by Dr. Conor Nixon (NASA) while conceptualizing the Sononaut plug-ins. I took some necessary artistic liberties through imaginative and conceptual deliberations made within the coding parameters, or ‘character’ of each plug-in. Complete ‘accuracy’ is impossible because of an inherent lack of knowability so, in this sense, artistic interpretation is used to bridge the gap between data and my own imagination. I also assign superhuman qualities to users, meaning that one of my core assumptions is that we can somehow survive these uninhabitable atmospheres. The Sononaut plug-ins allow artists, scientists, researchers, musicians, and composers alike to control and modify effects that simulate what we would hear if we were listening through extraterrestrial atmospheric conditions— bringing us a little closer to ‘stepping into’ these other worlds.

(Stefana Fratila)


CREDITS

Author: Stefana Fratila & Jen Kutler 
Using abstractions by Katja Vetter, Philipp Schmalfuss, Serge Poltavsky and Camomile by Pierre Guillot.

Concept: Stefana Fratila (http://stefanafratila.com)
Developer: Jen Kutler (http://jenkutler.com) 
Windows QA and Windows Installer: Tim Light
Calculations: Dr. Conor A. Nixon (NASA)

– Weather Loops –
Written and Produced by Stefana Fratila: Stefana Fratila
Mixing Engineer: Lisa Conway 
Mastering Engineer: Sage Kim at Lacquer Channel Mastering

Special thanks to everyone at NASA, especially: Bruce Banerdt, David Crisp, Lori S. Glaze, Daniel E. Goods, David C. Gruel, Scott D. Guzewich, Joseph R. Harris, Natasha M. Johnson, Conor A. Nixon, Keith S. Noll, Haley P. Reed, Amy A. Simon, Wade E. Sisler, Linda J. Spilker, Tom Spilker, Lina Tran, and Geronimo Luis Villanueva.

Thank you as well to Leif Bloomquist, Eric Choi, Derek Coulombe, Nicolas Cowan, Eric Dahlstrom, Jonathan Scherk, Samuel Dzierzawa, Thomas Weideman, Kerry Maguire, Ash Luk, Lida Pawliuk, Andi G. Petculescu, Sands Fish, Bettina Forget, Bryan Gaensler, Michael Reid, Matt Russo, Andrew Santaguida, and to everyone at Centro Mexicano para la Música y las Artes Sonoras (CMMAS)– especially Francisco Colasanto, Silvana Casal, Silvia de la Cueva Díaz, Daniel López, Tonalli Rufino Nakamura, and Rodrigo Sigal.

Created with the generous support of the Canada Council for the Arts.
