SATURN


STORY

I spend two days on Saturn because it’s my favourite. I spend a long time floating within the rings, listening to the colliding particles. The sound of the spinning comets, asteroids and shattered moons remind me of electricity. The next day I am in the planet’s folds. There’s a big storm every twenty or thirty years, and today is a calmer day. The gas feels less compressed. The helium raindrops fall everywhere around me. I go as far as the Danube lets me, but they’re still fully formed droplets when the runabout stops me from going further. I imagine how the raindrops are evaporating from the heat, further below me. I spend a few moments strapped to the side of the ship in my suit, listening for the sound of the rain, but it’s a quiet sound. My suit and runabout are the only objects the raindrops ever land on.

(continued in Uranus)


NOTES

Saturn’s rings are believed to be made up of shattered pieces of nearby asteroids, comets and moons– torn apart by Saturn’s gravity. The ice and rock particles in the rings are extremely densely packed together, meaning the colliding particles might make a sound as they hit each other. The orbital velocity of the rings ranges between 17 to 75 kms/hr. Particles that are closer to the planet rotate much faster than particles at the outer edge. I played on the idea of colliding particles and orbital velocity in creating Saturn’s weather loop.

Saturn is the second largest planet in the solar system, and its beautiful rings can be visible from Earth with binoculars. The planet is covered with jet streams and storms, although Saturn’s weather is normally quite calm (a violent storm erupts every 20-30 years). When the planet is engulfed by a giant storm, its wind speeds are much higher than Jupiter’s, and its giant lightning storm can last for half a year (this was the case in 2010). Saturn's north pole has a very unique atmospheric feature that exists nowhere else in the solar system—a six-sided jet stream (also known as the ‘hexagon’)

The pressure on Saturn is so intense that it can squeeze gas into liquid. At its centre, its core is made up of metals like iron and nickel, solidified by the intense pressure and soaring temperatures. Since Saturn is also a Gas Giant, there is no surface for rain and snow to land on. In other words, any rain or snow would evaporate from the intense heat before ever ‘hitting’ a surface. Its gas clouds would reflect and amplify sounds, and sounds might travel very far (think of how you can hear trains better on rainy days). 

Calculations (by Dr. Conor Nixon) used in the Saturn plug-in design:

Surface pressure ‘P’ (bar): 1.000
Surface temperature ’T’ (K): 95
Gas components: Hydrogen (93%), Helium (7%)
Mean Molecular Weight (g): 2.14
Atmospheric Density ‘rho’ (kg/m3): 0.27 
Mean Adiabatic Index (gamma): 1.60
Speed Sound (m/s): 769
Speed Sound Relative to Earth = 1: 221.66%
Pitch shift of middle ‘C’ (Hz): 579

(Stefana Fratila)

Source and further information: https://solarsystem.nasa.gov/planets/saturn/


METHODOLOGY

How might embodied subjects perceive sound waves as they travel through the different atmospheres of our solar system? How would the vibrations of Venus feel to a fleshy form? If we were to put our ears to the ground, or lie down our bodies, would we not feel the Mercuryquakes below the surface? And isn’t feeling sound the epitome of experiencing it? These questions constituted my conversations with scientists and researchers at NASA between 2018 and 2019. 

As I began my research, it was immediately apparent that every planet (except for Mercury) is incredibly windy. My mind was racing, imagining the planets as windy tunnels and reverberant rooms: if I could turn the wind off, what would my voice, or my songs, sound like then? To find out, I had to imagine the interplanetary weather patterns and geographical features as music, as if the thunder clouds and volcanoes were musical instruments in and of themselves. Every planet has its own frequency; if we decide that Earth is middle C (261.63 Hertz), each other planet must also have its own pitch based on its own surface pressure, surface temperature, gas components and atmospheric density.

I relied extensively on calculations made by Dr. Conor Nixon (NASA) while conceptualizing the Sononaut plug-ins. I took some necessary artistic liberties through imaginative and conceptual deliberations made within the coding parameters, or ‘character’ of each plug-in. Complete ‘accuracy’ is impossible because of an inherent lack of knowability so, in this sense, artistic interpretation is used to bridge the gap between data and my own imagination. I also assign superhuman qualities to users, meaning that one of my core assumptions is that we can somehow survive these uninhabitable atmospheres. The Sononaut plug-ins allow artists, scientists, researchers, musicians, and composers alike to control and modify effects that simulate what we would hear if we were listening through extraterrestrial atmospheric conditions— bringing us a little closer to ‘stepping into’ these other worlds.

(Stefana Fratila)


CREDITS

Author: Stefana Fratila & Jen Kutler 
Using abstractions by Katja Vetter, Philipp Schmalfuss, Serge Poltavsky and Camomile by Pierre Guillot.

Concept: Stefana Fratila (http://stefanafratila.com)
Developer: Jen Kutler (http://jenkutler.com) 
Windows QA and Windows Installer: Tim Light
Calculations: Dr. Conor A. Nixon (NASA)

– Weather Loops –
Written and Produced by Stefana Fratila: Stefana Fratila
Mixing Engineer: Lisa Conway 
Mastering Engineer: Sage Kim at Lacquer Channel Mastering

Special thanks to everyone at NASA, especially: Bruce Banerdt, David Crisp, Lori S. Glaze, Daniel E. Goods, David C. Gruel, Scott D. Guzewich, Joseph R. Harris, Natasha M. Johnson, Conor A. Nixon, Keith S. Noll, Haley P. Reed, Amy A. Simon, Wade E. Sisler, Linda J. Spilker, Tom Spilker, Lina Tran, and Geronimo Luis Villanueva.

Thank you as well to Leif Bloomquist, Eric Choi, Derek Coulombe, Nicolas Cowan, Eric Dahlstrom, Jonathan Scherk, Samuel Dzierzawa, Thomas Weideman, Kerry Maguire, Ash Luk, Lida Pawliuk, Andi G. Petculescu, Sands Fish, Bettina Forget, Bryan Gaensler, Michael Reid, Matt Russo, Andrew Santaguida, and to everyone at Centro Mexicano para la Música y las Artes Sonoras (CMMAS)– especially Francisco Colasanto, Silvana Casal, Silvia de la Cueva Díaz, Daniel López, Tonalli Rufino Nakamura, and Rodrigo Sigal.

Created with the generous support of the Canada Council for the Arts.
